[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Well, I've been interested
in health for a long time.
And my first exposure
to that was really
through reading Dr. Ken
Cooper's book on exercise
called "Aerobics" in 1968.
And really I've been
exercising ever since then.
And it started me down
the path of wellness.
And then I actually want to
be an astronaut at one point,
but decided that after my
involvement with the United
States government process
that it would probably
be wiser to go into medicine
and stick to health.
And I'm very glad I did that.
But I didn't have an epiphany or
a particular health challenge.
I've been pretty
healthy my whole life.
Well, Western medicine
primarily focuses
on the use of drugs and surgery
as a solution for the symptoms.
They rarely ever
look at the cause.
And that's due to a
complex series of processes
that occurred over time
that really involve the drug
companies and the food industry
giants that really dictate much
of the policy and
the direction that's
transferred through
the education system
and through the media.
Whereas natural
medicine really seeks
to focus applying
natural solutions
that have been around
for ages and time
tested, of course, and
as a result of that very
few if any side effects.
And they are really
directed towards addressing
what the cause of the
health challenge is
rather than treating
the symptoms.
And symptom treatment
is important, of course.
Especially if you're
in acute trauma,
you're going to want
some pain relief,
but that is really
about the benefit of it
is in acute care medicine.
One usually becomes sick
or encounters disease
when they're following
a lifestyle typically
that's different
than one was really
designed to follow in
conjunction with exposure
to many modern day
toxins and chemicals.
So the combination usually
is what predisposes one
to developing that.
And typically, that involves--
some of those strategies
would be not eating properly,
of course-- exposure
to too many processed
foods and the chemicals
in those foods.
Not sleeping well-- exposure
to electromagnetic radiation
and stresses in
cell phones and EMFs
from a refrigerator that might
be behind your bedroom wall.
So these are all
variables that tend
to detract from the
vitality of the system.
And it's really when you
get a critical threshold
of a certain number of them that
the body is unable to tolerate
at some point, and
then an assault
comes in and
challenges the person.
It's why many people
believe or feel
that cold is caused by a virus.
And while that may
be the trigger, it
really it is a challenge
with a person's immune system
that is unable to
respond to that.
Because normally we're
designed to live in harmony
with these infectious agents.
Its only when we have a problem
in our own internal system
that that's allowed
to take over.
Well, obesity is an
interesting challenge.
And it's been my
personal belief that this
is related to certainly
a number of variables,
but the primary
culprit I believe
is related to fructose,
which is a simple sugar.
It's typically combined with
glucose, so a disaccharide,
and that's what cane
sugar is or table sugar.
But when you break it apart
and have simple fructose,
as is in high
fructose corn syrup,
which is the number one source
of calories in the United
States--
the number one source
of calories is fructose.
So when this is the
primary source of food
that most people are
consuming, then there's
metabolic consequences
of that that
really start this
cascade that leads
to a variety of conditions.
One of the primary ones
is insulin resistance.
And when you're
insulin resistant,
then you have an impairment
of the metabolic enzymes
to help you break down fat.
So that's impaired.
And as a result of that,
it's really difficult
to lose weight.
So that's probably the primary
one-- and in conjunction
with exercise, of course.
And there's been interestingly
an increase in exercise,
but the focus has
been traditionally
on aerobic or cardio, which is
not the best type of exercise
to help one lose weight.
Well, the issue of who's
responsible for this epidemic I
believe really depends
on the population
that you're looking at.
The typical average
American is exposed
to a plethora of advertising--
media manipulation-- in a
number of different channels.
And when you're continually
bombarded with that,
and it's reinforced by the
traditional media which
is purported to be news,
it's difficult to break out
of that process.
So if one doesn't invest
significant time, effort,
and energy to do independent
analysis, which fortunately
is relatively easy to do
through tools like the internet,
then it's easy to
become confused.
And this is a carefully
orchestrated process.
But ultimately I think the
responsibility goes back
to the individuals.
I mean, we all are
responsible for taking
control of our health.
It's not great breaking
news that there's
this bias and prejudice
from the traditional media.
Unless one has been living under
a rock, one is aware of this.
Especially as one encounters
health challenges that
aren't responding with the
traditional model-- of course,
that's the vast majority of
them from my experience-- then
it's incumbent upon one
to explore the options
that the traditional
conventional model
is recommending.
Well, I believe there
are 80,000 chemicals
or so that have been introduced
in the last 100 years or so.
And of course, the industry
is creating more and more
every day.
And really none of them are
highly beneficial for you
in any amount, but it really
becomes an exposure issue.
So the more exposure you
have to these toxins,
the worse it's going to be.
And there are some that
are particularly potent
and should be
avoided at all costs.
I believe one of the most
serious ones is mercury.
Really, a drop of mercury in an
Olympic-sized swimming pool is
considered--
the entire swimming pool
would be considered toxic
by OSHA standards.
So it's quite toxic.
And the typical exposures
that most Americans
have would be in seafood or in
their silver, which is really
50% mercury, fillings.
So that's why it's really
important not to have
those put in to begin with.
And if you had to
have silver fillings,
you want to make
sure that they're
removed but not just willy nilly
by the conventional dentist
because they don't believe
that there are problems.
They want to be removed by
an experienced biologically
trained dentist
that can usually be
identified in your
local community
by just asking people--
health store,
friends or relatives
who are involved
in that community,
and they can tell you
who the dentist that's
qualified to take it up and
not cause more problems.
The other toxins that are
pervasive would be fluoride.
And most unfortunately, most of
the water supply in the United
States is fluoridated.
And so we have this
regular exposure.
And then most people are
using fluoridated toothpaste,
but they're not eating organic
foods so most of the pesticides
are fluoridated.
So you've got these
ongoing exposures
which can be quite pervasive.
And because it's
a large exposure,
it can really present a problem.
And I believe it's one of
the primary reasons why
we have really relatively an
epidemic of hypothyroidism.
Well, there are a variety of the
toxins that the EPA and the FDA
are responsible for regulating.
And depending on which
ones were discussing,
there are different reasons why
they take the actions they do.
With the issue of
fluoride, it's become
really pushed by
the dental community
as believing that to be safe and
probably some other influences
in addition to that.
But that has really
guided the direction
of these governmental
regulatory agencies.
Although recently, I
believe the CDC came out
with a recommendation to reduce
the lower level of fluoridation
of the American
water supplies, which
was a definite step in
the right direction.
But there tends to be a
revolving door between most
industries and the governmental
regulatory authorities
so that if a person is
hired in the government,
they may receive a job
in the very industry
that they were responsible for
regulating prior to shifting.
Or the converse is true also.
So this intermingling of
the government and industry
really plays a very significant
role, because it's just
a massive conflict of
interest and really
doesn't serve the
public health very well.
The issue of food cravings
is relatively complex.
There is obviously
behavioral components,
but there's also very
clever science behind this.
The food industry is
multi billions-- tens
of billions of dollars.
And they have the wherewithal
and the science resources
to really identify very
carefully what appeals
to the average consumer.
And as a result of that,
they can use these chemical
derivatives to create these
concoctions which really
taste quite good and can have
an addictive component-- not
necessarily, but can.
And in addition to
that, tasting good,
because of the way that
the food is mass produced,
they can actually offer it at
a relatively low price which,
of course, is a significant
issue for many people,
especially in our economy.
So that combination of low cost
and appealing is a big issue.
But then one of the other ones
is, as I mentioned earlier,
the number one source of
calories in the United States
is fructose.
And fructose is
highly addictive.
So it's very inexpensive.
In the '70s, Japanese scientists
develop the technology
to separate fructose from
corn, thus radically reducing
the cost of this
high fructose corn
syrup relative to
traditional forms of sugar.
So in many ways, fructose
isn't that much worse
than regular sugar, but
because it's so less expensive,
it's more widely used, and
larger quantities of it
wind up in the food
supply so that you're
getting exposed to more of it.
In the 1900s, the average
person was exposed
to about 15 grams of fructose.
And fructose-- another term
for that is fruit sugar.
And of course, it's why
most fruits are sweet.
And fructose, in small
amounts, 15, 25 grams,
which is less than
an ounce a day,
is probably OK
and healthy if you
don't have insulin resistance.
But the average person is
consuming 70 to 80 grams a day.
And there are many kids,
primarily teenagers,
who are taking 120, 150
grams of fructose a day,
literally 10 times
the amount that they
were taking a century ago.
So when you abuse
that type of sugar
and you have that
exposure, it has
very severe metabolic
consequences
that can lead to these addictive
processes and change brain
chemistry and really make
it very difficult to get out
of this cycle where you
have these food cravings
and really addicted
to food that's
not going to make you healthy.
So it's common when
you go to a food court,
and you see a whole variety of
food options-- and many of them
can actually be healthy,
but most of course are not.
They're these processed foods.
And it's really quite surprising
to see people routinely
make these unhealthy choices.
And so the question is, why?
And I believe, though there's
a number of factors that
contribute to it, but in
many cases it's just a habit
and a lack of awareness, because
a typical person doesn't really
understand the profound
connection between the food
they eat-- even though it's
relatively simple and it seems
so basic--
but they don't
understand that there's
a consequence of
choosing processed
foods over a long period of time
that will have negative health
consequences.
And they don't understand that.
So it's really an
issue of ignorance.
And the other food--
the processed food actually
taste good, so they taste good,
it's relatively
inexpensive, and they
have this habit and this
ignorance or lack of awareness
of the connection between
the consequences of making
those choices over a
long period of time.
Because processed food--
I mean, 90% of the money
that Americans spend on food
is for processed food--
90%.
And processed food is
OK to have occasionally.
Maybe 5% or 10% of your
diet can be processed food.
But if you've got it mixed
up and it's 90% of your diet,
there is just no
question there are
going to be consequences to pay
for making that type of choice.
You know, it's interesting
that there has been a trend
to use a healthy
alternative to sugar,
because most people
believe and understand--
it's not rocket science.
They know sugar is not
good for-- yes, they'll
choose to eat it
because it tastes good
and it's not that expensive,
but really tastes good
and they get this vicious cycle.
But they seek to make
a healthy choice,
and the food industry
cooperates by providing them
artificial sweeteners
with no calories.
So what is the danger
of making that choice?
Well, I actually wrote a book
on that, "Sweet Deception,"
and studied this for
a number of years
and looked at the literature.
But before I wrote the book,
I wasn't aware of which
choice was worse--
either artificial
sweeteners or sugar--
and after doing
the research, I'm
absolutely convinced that
artificial sweeteners
are far more serious.
And there's a number of them
on the market, of course.
And they have
different toxicities.
But probably the worst is
NutraSweet or aspartame,
or Equal.
They're all the same.
So two are brand names and
one is the generic name.
And NutraSweet is
actually a dipeptide,
which means there are two
amino acids linked together.
And it's marketed
as being natural.
Well, those are natural,
but they were never
designed to be linked
together like that
and in taken such large amounts.
And they actually are
connected with what's
called an ester bond.
And when this ester
bond breaks apart,
one of the byproducts
is formaldehyde--
actually, methanol, which is
transported past the blood
brain barrier and goes
into the brain and
turns to formaldehyde.
So it's very, very toxic.
So that's probably one of
its largest toxicities,
and it can contribute to tumors
and seizures and migraines
and headaches and a
whole variety of others.
And I believe that
side effects reported
to the FDA or any other
governmental agency that's
responsible for collecting
this data are literally
orders of magnitude higher
than almost all the other food
sources put together.
So it's a significant issue.
And interestingly,
like most reports,
including vaccines,
what's actually reported
is just the tip of the iceberg.
It's probably well less
than 10%, probably under 1%.
So it's a significant issue.
But getting back to those
other amino acids that
are supposedly natural,
even when they break down,
they are there in far
larger concentrations
than you would normally receive
by eating that in a food.
So as a result, these ratios,
which are so important,
become disturbed.
Aspartame also has two
amino acids linked together.
And when that's
digested in the body,
then they're broken down
into two separate ones.
And the problem with that
is that these are typically
in much larger concentrations
than you typically
would receive from eating food.
So these ratios become
really disturbed.
And one of the amino
acids is aspartic acid.
And that actually has been shown
to be an excitive toxin, which
has its own intrinsic problems.
But then the other
one is phenylalanine,
which is a precursor
to some really
important neurotransmitters.
And you develop imbalances
in serotonin in the brain.
As a result of that, it
can be a real challenge.
And it's interesting
too, if you look
at the studies that examined
the approval or actually
the toxicity of
aspartame, I think
this was done by Dr. Frank
Walton about 15, 20 years ago
or so.
And it just is a
classic illustration
of this massive
conflict of interest.
Of the approximately
90 says that were done
that showed that there was no
side effects from aspartame,
over 90% of those were
funded by industry.
And you have almost the
same number of other studies
that were independently funded
finding the exact reverse--
90% of them showing
problems with it.
Unfortunately when a food
additive like aspartame or any
artificial sweetener is
manufactured-- or Splenda--
the process of getting
approval is really
that the manufacturer or
the company that's making it
is the one that
funds the studies.
And those are the
studies that are
submitted to the regulatory
agency to provide approval.
So it's not this
independent, third party,
objective evaluation
that's being done,
like most people's impression.
I think most people
believe the FDA actually
has their own scientists
that do this analysis,
but nothing could be
further from the truth.
It basically
evaluates the studies
that the industry
submits that they funded,
which, of course, is just
fraught with massive conflict
of interests.
[INAUDIBLE] a number of
people in the past who've had
challenges with this,
and some of them
my own personal
relatives-- my own sister
has migraines when she
takes any food that has
artificial sweeteners in it.
She normally avoids it,
but sometimes it's hidden
and it's not really
labeled well.
In fact, interestingly,
if you look
at the new approach in marketing
for these bottled waters
or flavored waters.
And they taste
great-- and you wonder
why does it-- how could
it possibly taste so good?
And if you read in fine
2 to 4 point print that
is very difficult to see
because it's basically
dark font on dark
background, there's
artificial sweeteners in there,
like Splenda or sucralose.
So they don't
advertise it as such,
and it's really
hidden in many cases.
So migraines can be a common
one-- visual disturbances,
headaches.
These are all potential
complications--
and seizures in
more serious cases--
visual dysfunctions.
Actually, most pilots
are aware that they
can't drink diet sodas
because it's well recognized
within the pilot association
that you just don't drink this
because it can really
cause severe aberrations
in your vision that
would potentially
lead to the problems
with your flying.
And there's a whole list of--
there's literally hundreds
of different symptoms.
So it's easy to look
them up on the internet
and find out if it is.
But really there's no reason
ever to be drinking diet soda.
There's just none.
And just want to make a
distinction here that sometimes
people who haven't studied
this carefully throw stevia
into the basket with
artificial sweeteners.
And nothing could be
further from the truth.
Stevia is a plant.
It's an herb.
It's a medicinal herb
that's raised primarily
in South America.
That what's its origins from.
It's been around
for 1,500 years.
And it's very sweet.
You can grow this plant in
your backyard or in your home.
And you can chew the raw leaves.
And you'll see it's very sweet.
So that is typically
a better alternative.
Some people don't like
the aftertaste it has,
but that may be a reflection
of the way it's processed.
So some of the
newer ones, they're
used as a liquid
stevia and actually
of other flavors like
the French vanilla
or English toffee that
actually are quite good
and can be a much better
alternative to sugar and then
certainly artificial sweeteners.
Hormone by definition
is a chemical.
Typically, a hormone is
secreted by gland in your body.
And it then is transported
in the bloodstream
to have an effect distantly
or somewhere else in the body.
So that's the strict
definition of a hormone.
And there's a number of them,
but the two primary ones
that most people
are concerned about
are your adrenal hormones,
your sex hormones, estrogen,
and then, of course,
thyroid hormones.
So those are the
primary ones that
tend to have health challenges.
And the adrenal
hormones tend to be
the most complex with respect to
understanding them and balance.
And most of the time, in
my experience, dysfunctions
or disturbance into your
hormones are related to stress.
So processes and therapies
that are addressing
balancing that, such as
emotional freedom technique
or other energy
psychology tools,
or meditation or
prayer or exercise--
these can all be useful tools to
help moderate adrenal stresses.
The problem with the adrenals
and why they're so essential
is that once those are
imbalanced or unbalanced,
that has consequences to the
other hormones, specifically
the sex hormones.
So rather than trying to be
a biochemist or pharmacist
and try to individually treat
an incorrect or low or high
hormone level, you really want
to balance the whole system
naturally if you can.
But one of the other
hormones that tends to be low
is thyroid hormone.
And it's really almost an
epidemic, especially in women.
And this is related to
two primary reasons.
One is that we have a
massive unnecessary exposure
of fluoride.
And fluoride is a
toxin to the thyroid.
Fluoride actually
displaces iodide.
And iodine is part
of thyroid hormone.
Typically, there's three or
four molecules of iodine there.
And when you're having
large amounts of fluoride,
the fluoride actually goes
into the thyroid gland,
displaces the ioidine,
so you have a fluoride
molecule instead of
iodide, and that's
not active and doesn't work.
So that's one of
the reasons why.
And then also soy is perceived
by many to be a health food
and actually has
chemicals in there,
like isoflavones and
hormones, which are
basically toxic to the thyroid.
So people who have high
amounts of soy in their diet--
specifically soy milk tends to
be one of the worse because you
can just get large amounts
of these proteins--
that they can have a consequence
and have reduced thyroid
function as a result of it.
It's somewhat of a challenge
to recover from that
without having to go
on thyroid hormones.
And actually treating
thyroid dysfunction
is a whole science in
itself and really could
be the topic of the
whole documentary.
And one of the last ones
would be the female hormones,
sex hormones, primarily
estrogen and progesterone.
And then for men,
testosterone and DHEA.
Although men and
women have levels
of all of those in
their system, of course,
the women have higher levels
of estrogen, progesterone,
and men testosterone and DHEA.
So in my experience, most
women who are ideally healthy
will tend to have lower
levels of progesterone
and sometimes will benefit
from some progesterone
supplementation.
And men tends to be DHA.
So those can be--
frequently, many
people find benefit
from augmenting them or
taking supplemental forms.
The problem becomes
on how you administer
those supplemental hormones.
And it took me quite
a while in a process
to go through to understand that
most people are administering
hormones incorrectly.
This is related to the fact
that most hormones are given
are given orally or swallowed.
And unfortunately, they don't
work that way in your body.
When you swallow a hormone,
you have to break it down
and your liver metabolizes
it, and it makes byproducts,
and perhaps 75% to 80% of it has
not gone into your bloodstream.
So as a result of that, you
have to take much higher levels.
And then you can
have side effects
from the metabolites
of the hormone.
So you really shouldn't
swallow oral hormones.
It's not a good idea.
So don't do that.
Now, then some
people think, well,
then I could take a
sublingual, because there's
capillaries under your tongue
and that may transfer directly
to your bloodstream.
And though some of it does, the
problem with sublingual drops
is that, frequently,
many people swallow them.
So then you have the same issue
of swallowing and hormones.
Well, then you have-- then
let's rub it on your skin.
And especially a lot of
naturally oriented physicians
are recommending this.
And that works initially, but
then most places on the skin,
they have fat, and then it tends
to build up in your system.
And as a result,
that works initially
but then it tends to
stop working over time.
So I actually abandoned the use
of supplement hormone therapy
until I reconnect with Dr.
Jonathan Wright, who is really
one of the pioneers in hormone
therapy in the United States.
He's really the
physician who brought it
into the United States.
So what Dr. Wright
noticed after his years
of clinical observation was--
and figured out that if you
apply the hormone topically,
but apply it to
mucosal surfaces,
then you don't have this issue
with the fat penetration,
and it tends to go right
into the bloodstream.
So the mucosal
surfaces would be,
in women, the vaginal
area, the vaginal mucosa,
or in women and men,
the rectum mucosa.
So administering
hormones there, if you're
going to use that
form of therapy,
would be the wise
way-- if you're
using sex hormones, like
progesterone, estrogen, DHEA,
or testosterone.
If you're taking thyroid
hormone, that of course
can be swallowed
because that's not
a problem with thyroid hormone.
It's a different
type of molecule.
There is a common myth
that's been perpetuated
by the media and most nearly
every single dermatologist
in the United States and
probably the world who
is advocating avoiding sun
because it's dangerous.
And they create this massive
fear that exposing the skin
is going to cause two things.
One, increase your risk of
cancer, which is not true.
And then second, it will
increase photoaging,
which can be true, but you
have to use exposure sun
with caution.
So with respect to
cancer, it actually
decreases the risk of cancer.
And interestingly, when the
epidemiologists, the scientists
who study that process of
disease and the risk factors,
look at this and analyze
it very carefully,
they find that if
people had been exposed
to optimal amounts of
sunshine, the rate of cancer
would drop by nearly 50%.
So we're talking hundreds
of thousands of people
every year not die from
cancer because they
don't have enough vitamin D.
So what are the
risks, the downside?
Well, the downside is
you may have an increased
risk of basal cell
carcinoma, which
is an easily
excised cancer, just
for the most part cosmetic,
and it is not really dangerous.
But for the most part,
actually the newer studies
show that it decreases the risk
of the dangerous cancer which
can kill you, which is melanoma.
So it actually lowers
it by somewhat primarily
because it raises
your vitamin D levels.
But all of us want to
look healthy and good
when we're older.
So we want to be
conscious of photoaging.
And what you can do
is really there's--
the ideal way to optimize
your vitamin D levels
is exposing as much
of your skin as is
legally possible to the sun.
And so if you're
going out to sun
like I am right now, and
really the only things that
are exposed are my
hands and my head,
I'm not going to
get much vitamin D.
So you really need to
take your shirt off
and wear shorts and really
have a significant exposure.
So that's a big issue.
But typically, there's
not a big reason
to have a lot of sun
shining down in your face,
because it's a relatively
small surface area.
And the skin is
relatively thin, so it's
particularly vulnerable
to photo-oxidative damage.
So what I recommend
is to wear a hat.
I typically always wear
a hat when I'm out.
My face is in the shade.
I don't have direct
sunlight most of the time.
And if you're
particularly concerned,
or you're fair complexion,
you blonde or blue eyes,
or you tend to
sunburn real easily,
then you might want to put some
safe sunscreen around there
to make sure that
you don't get it.
Because you have to understand
that when you use sunscreen
on the rest of your body, it
eliminates your body's ability
to make vitamin D. You won't
get burned if it's applied
properly, but you won't get
any vitamin D. It blocks
the very rays, the ultraviolet
B radiation, that causes
your body to make vitamin D.
So if you're not going to get
burnt or you're not
going to get tanned,
you're not going
to get vitamin D.
There's a major challenge
for most everyone
to know what their
vitamin D level is.
It's somewhat like high blood
pressure in that we really
don't know we have high
blood pressure for the most
part unless you measure it.
Well, similarly, we don't
know that our vitamin D
levels are fine.
Now, if you have
a deep healthy tan
like I happen to do
right now, there's
absolutely no reason to measure.
You can be guaranteed that
your vitamin D levels are just
about near perfect.
But if you're not,
and you and you
know you don't have relative
exposure to the sun,
then you really don't
have another option
unless you're going
to use a safe tanning
bed, which is I think
better than swallowing it.
But it's not either
convenient or cost effective
for many to do that.
So the only way you're going
to know if you have vitamin D
is to measure it.
That's the only way we know how.
Now, typically the
adult dose is--
most people who take
vitamin D think they're
taking a lot at 1,000 or
2,000, but that's still
seriously deficient.
The RDA is still only 400 to
800 depending on whose numbers
you're looking at.
But we really need--
most adults need
about 5,000 to 6,000--
I would say probably closer
to 6,000 to 8,000 units a day,
every day.
I mean, you just break down
about 4,000 units every day.
And most people don't
understand that when
you are having enough skin
exposed to healthy sunshine,
you can make up to
20,000 units in a day.
So it's not like it's toxic.
And there's this fear that's
been created that they're going
to have vitamin D toxicity.
There's nothing could be
further from the truth.
Most people, I would say--
when we look at
the numbers, and it
depends on which
ranges you're using
because the typical
reference ranges
that are used to
evaluate Vitamin D levels
are antiquated.
They're outdated.
And they really were designed
to prevent rickets, which is--
you need the least amount of
vitamin D to prevent rickets.
But when you're looking to
use vitamin D therapeutically
to optimize health
to prevent cancer,
to prevent heart
disease, to optimize
the 2,000 to 3,000
genes that it regulates,
then you're going to
need levels in excess
of 50 nanograms per milliliter.
And that is, if you're
watching this in Australia
or some other
European countries,
you'd multiply by 2.5 to
get the nano moles per liter
I think it's called.
So at least 50 and
probably up to 80.
I like to keep mine
between 60 and 70.
I think it's a healthy range.
And when I personally am exposed
to large amounts of sunshine,
my numbers typically
go close to 100.
We know that the
food that you eat
has an enormous
influence on your health.
So it becomes really important
to be conscious of what you're
eating and to look at the
variables or the factors that
contribute to making
healthy choices.
And many of us have been
exposed to childhood influences
and parents that
really give us comfort
for certain types
of food behaviors.
So if you find that you're
one of those individuals who
have behaviors that are not
healthy that may be related
to these types of
influences, then there
are a number of
strategies that you
can use that have been
found to be effective.
And I find that energy
psychology tools
are some of the most effective
ones that you can use.
And one of the most common
ones is a technique called EFT,
or Emotional Freedom
Technique for short,
which is a simple tapping on
acupuncture meridians done
with skilled questions and
typically by someone else.
I mean, you can use these
techniques on yourself,
but they're not
nearly as effective
as working with someone
who's trained in this
and really has helped many
others and is skilled.
And it's a very powerful
and profoundly effective,
nearly magical technique.
So that is something that
certainly can be used.
And there's no side effects.
There's no harm or damage that
can come as a result of it.
So the worst that would
be is it didn't work.
But it has a great potential to
affect some of these behaviors.
But interestingly, one of
the most powerful choices
that you can make
is the commitment
to have the discipline
and make the decision
to avoid these unhealthy foods,
primarily sugar and processed
foods.
But once you get them out of
your diet for two, three weeks,
especially after 21 days, your
body tends to self regulate
and you tend not to
want them as much.
So if you can just do whatever
it takes for those three weeks
to get over the hump, so to
speak, and start to experience
some of the benefits,
because unfortunately
during those three
weeks, you may
go through some withdrawals.
It may not feel that great.
And understanding that it
could happen beforehand
will help you get through it.
But once you do that and you
reach the three week period,
usually you're
feeling a lot better
because you're replacing
those unhealthy foods
with healthy foods, giving
you vitality, energy that you
probably haven't
had for a long time
and getting rid of a
lot of the symptoms
that you may not have been aware
were related to the poor food
choices that you were making.
So that really is
a powerful strategy
that one can implement if
they're seeking to get healthy.
OK.
There's a series of strategies
that has really collectively
been called energy psychology
and typically developed
by psychologists.
And my understand is there's
about 10,000 psychologists who
are actively employing
these techniques.
And they have regular annual
conferences and [INAUDIBLE]
and are constantly
evolving them.
One of the most popular ones
is Emotional Freedom Technique,
or EFT for short.
And it's a process
where one does
tapping on acupuncture
meridians concurrently while one
is saying something
that's actually triggering
the neurological pathways that
is contributing to the issue
that one wants to treat.
So typically when one is really
involved in that emotion,
that is probably the ideal
time to do this process.
But it can be
radically effective.
And there's just no question,
no doubt in my mind--
I've been practicing medicine
for over three decades.
And the most dramatic,
impressive, literally miracle
responses I've ever
seen were the result
of using this technique.
Two out of three people in
the industrialized world
are overweight.
It's an epidemic.
And one of three people
are actually obese.
And we know there's enormous
consequences from a health
perspective of carrying
this extra weight.
And then from a
psychological perspective,
people don't feel good about.
At least most people don't
feel good about themselves.
They're embarrassed or ashamed.
They wish they could look
better and feel better and have
less health complications.
So why can't they do it?
Why do we had this
massive epidemic?
Well, I think for the most part
there's two primary reasons.
But after reviewing
this really carefully,
I'm convinced the single most
important reason is really
the foods that you're eating.
You can exercise like a maniac,
but if you're making poor food
choices, it's very,
very difficult
to compensate for
the food choices.
So diet's about
70% to 80% of it.
Exercise is really crucial.
And to be effective, I
think it's really difficult,
if not impossible in many
cases, to have effective weight
loss without combining both.
So you could starve yourself and
not exercise and still not be
able to lose a lot of weight.
So you really need
the combination.
But really, the focus
needs to be on the foods
that you're eating.
And in my experience, well,
it's not rocket science.
Again, when we look at what
foods are people eating,
if you look at the numbers,
the number one source
of calories in the United
States is fructose, specifically
in the form of sugar from sodas.
So that's the most common,
but it is pervasive,
because it's so inexpensive
to make that it's
added to just about every food.
So that really needs to be
eliminated from the diet
because it's one of
the primary reasons
that people develop what's
called insulin resistance.
If you have insulin resistance,
it becomes almost metabolically
impossible to lose weight
because the enzymes that
are responsible for
burning fat are impaired.
They're blocked.
So you just add fat.
You just won't burn
it effectively.
So you have to lower
insulin resistance.
And fortunately,
this is something
that's relatively easy
and expensive to measure.
You can just measure
your insulin level
and fasting-- not after
food, but after fasting
of about 8 to 12 hours.
And it should be
about two or three.
And if it's much higher, the
higher it is the worst it is,
the more difficult it's
going to be to lose weight.
So the key is to lower
your insulin resistance.
And you do that by
not eating sugars.
And this is primarily fructose.
And the other way to do it
that's profoundly effective,
better than any drug we know
of, and literally is the cure
for another epidemic one of
four people in the United States
have, which is diabetes
or pre-diabetes--
and it's moving rapidly
to one in three.
And it's paralleling
the obesity epidemic.
And it's all related
to insulin resistance.
And I can tell you with
incredible confidence
and authority that
the drugs don't work.
And they recently
pulled one of the most--
at least from Europe,
they were wise enough
to pull it-- one of
the most popular drugs
to treat type 2 diabetes.
It's an oral hypoglycemic
called Avandia.
It was pulled from
the market in Europe,
but yet still
maintain and kept--
and physicians in the
United States were allowed
prescribe, but they gave
it a black box warning,
despite the fact that it killed
80,000 people and never, never
cured one person from diabetes.
This is atrocious when
you consider the fact
that we actually do have a
cure for type 2 diabetes.
And it's not insulin.
Insulin is almost as bad
as the oral hypoglycemics,
because there is never
a need for anyone
who has type 2 diabetes
to take insulin.
It's a disaster.
It is treating a symptom.
It's not treating the cause.
The cause is insulin
resistance, and if you
give someone with insulin
resistance more insulin,
you make the insulin
resistance worse.
So what will cure the
insulin resistance?
Diet and exercise would do it.
So you have to lower the foods
that cause insulin to rise.
And of course, that's
sugar but it's also
foods that act like sugar.
So if you have diabetes
or if you're overweight,
then you want to
eliminate foods that
raise insulin real rapidly,
which would be grains--
so that's breads, pasta, cereal
rice, potatoes, corn, waffles,
pancakes, most pretty much
any food for breakfast
that most people eat.
So those are the
foods that need to be
away from your diet
at least until you're
able to get the insulin
resistance under control.
And this includes
even healthy grains,
like organic,
biodynamically grown wheat
that's freshly ground.
And it could be health
food for some people,
but if you have
insulin resistance,
it should be avoided until you
are able to address the insulin
resistance.
So let me emphasize that
point because many people feel
they're doing the right
thing by getting off of sugar
and perhaps taking artificial
sweeteners, which you
don't want to do, of course.
But it's not just sugar.
You have to eliminate
the foods that break down
the sugars-- that's
rice, that's pasta,
that's corn, bread, potatoes.
Foods that rapidly
break down the sugar
raise your insulin level.
Cereals.
So all these things--
waffles, pancakes-- these are
foods that you have to avoid.
Even if they're organic and you
purchase them at Whole Foods,
it's not going to matter.
You need to stay away from them.
It's the rice, potatoes, and
the corn you've got to avoid--
and wheat-- until you control
the insulin resistance.
So the other part of
the equation, though,
which actually lowers insulin
resistance quite effectively,
is exercise.
Now, it's not just any exercise.
If you think you're-- now,
unless less you're morbidly
obese and weigh
400 or 500 pounds,
or you just have
no activity at all,
walking is not going to work.
It's a good first step, but
it rapidly loses its benefit
at lowering insulin resistance.
So you really need what's
called high intensity exercise.
And many people are under the
illusion that doing cardio
or aerobics is beneficial to
treat this, as I was for 30--
and I started
exercising in 1968--
for well over 30 to 40 years, I
believed that was the solution,
and it really isn't.
I mean, you can do some
cardio, but now I've
come to the conclusion that
you really don't need any.
And what you really need
are these high intensity
exercises where you're
pushing your body
to its physiological maximum
over a short period in sort
of like interval sprints.
And we've developed
a program called
Peak 8, which was
developed by Phil
Campbell on his principles.
And basically it's a
system where you only
use exercise for 20 minutes.
The first three minutes,
you're warming up.
Then, for 30 seconds, you're
going full out and exercising
really intensely.
And then you're
recovering for 90,
and then you do this
in eight cycles.
And then you cool down
for 2 and 1/2 minutes.
So the total time is 20 minutes.
And the intention is to engage
in activity and the intensity
of the activity that
eventually you get to the point
where you're at your calculated
maximum heart rate, which
is 220 minus your age.
So for someone like me, who's
56 years old, that would be 164.
Now, I like to go
a little harder,
and I try to get
mine's about 170
or even higher when
I'm doing my workout.
But this is something
that you work up to.
If someone hasn't engaged in
these kinds of activities,
then they don't want
to do it right away,
they want to work
up to it slowly.
Instead of doing
eight cycles, they
would start with two or
three, and then work up
so then they can tolerate that.
But the types of
activities that can do it--
probably the two best would be
something like a recumbent bike
where you're sitting
down and cycling,
a stationary recumbent bike
as opposes a regular bike,
and then an elliptical machine
that actually uses the arms.
So this happens
to be my favorite.
And it seems to be the
least mentally stressful
to do it, maybe because I've
been running for over 40 years
and I'm more inclined to
use that type of activity.
But it works really
well and can give you
this stimulus that will
lower your insulin resistance
but it also has a
marvelous other benefit,
because one of the hormone
deficiencies that invariably
is associated with
aging is growth hormone.
And virtually everyone
watching this tape, this video,
has heard of menopause.
Well, there's another
problem that occurs with age,
and it's called somatopause.
Now, what is somatopause?
Well, somatotropin is
the medical Latin term
for growth hormone.
And at about the--
actually earlier than aging
occurs for women going through
menopause, typically
late 30s or 40s,
we have a fairly dramatic
reduction of growth hormone
that is associated
with many of the anti--
or the aging process,
accelerated aging and decrease
in accelerating
telomere shortening.
So it's really important to
optimize your growth hormone.
And yes, we have
manufactured it.
We have a common
DNA growth hormone.
You could actually purchase
it for $1,000 or more a month
and inject it.
But your body wasn't
designed to do that,
and there's no feedback
loops, and you're not
going to optimize it.
You're going to
probably mess up.
So it's a lot less expensive
and a lot healthier and safer
to have your body make
your own growth hormone.
Interestingly,
very few exercises
will stimulate growth hormone.
There are a number of
different muscle fiber types
that we have-- the slow fibers,
the fast, and the superfast.
And the only way that you
can stimulate growth hormone
is to stimulate these
superfast muscle fibers.
So exercises like
running, or cardio,
or even strength training,
your typical aerobics, those
will not cause growth
hormone increase.
You need super high intensity
sprinting or explosive types
of activity where you'll know
because once you're engaged
them, even though it's
only a few minutes,
you'll start to sweat
profusely-- unless you have
thyroid problems, which is one
of the symptoms of low thyroid
function is you have
inhibited ability to sweat.
But most people, assuming
the thyroid functions well,
will start sweating
profusely when
they're doing these
high intensity
activities after a few minutes.
Now, I know you can sweat
doing aerobics and cardio,
but usually it takes a
lot longer to get to that.
And that's really
one of the keys
that I look at
internally to find out
if I'm engaging in
intense enough activity,
or if I'm doing
strength training,
because I think
strength training is
another crucial activity.
You can use weight training
to increase growth hormone,
but it has to be done
very specifically.
It just can't be
done traditionally.
Even though doing
it traditionally
is a good proactive process that
I believe everyone should do,
it's not massively important.
I think your food choices
and high intensity exercises
are more important, but
it is an important element
of a comprehensive
exercise program.
There is a show called "The
Biggest Loser" in which they
use large amounts of
exercise and really not
very careful attention to
details on the nutrition
to help people lose weight,
and they lose weight
relatively rapidly.
And so the question becomes,
is this a useful strategy?
Well, it's important to
understand that it's not just
losing weight that
is the issue here,
because you really need to
take a long-term perspective.
So you really want ideally to
develop behaviors and patterns
that one can continue
for a lifetime.
So there is no rush here to
necessarily lose the weight.
And the danger of doing that,
if you lose it too aggressively,
is that way especially without
some enhanced processes
to help the body detoxify,
is that these toxins,
the fat soluble toxins that
are pervasive, like pesticides
and such, that are stored,
that we all have exposure to,
are stored in our fat--
they have to be
properly excreted
because if they're
not, then they'll
relocate to other fat
stores in your body.
And that's really why--
but one of the most important
parts of a detoxification
process is actually
lowering your body fat,
because that's where
the toxins are stored.
So if you can reduce
them, and at the same time
you're reducing
the fat facilitate
the excretion of those
through the proper sweating
or through bowel
cleanses or combinations,
then you'll be able to
eliminate them from your body
rather than having them
concentrate and become
even more of a problem.
With respect to
detoxification, there's
a lot of confusion in
this area, because there's
so many different strategies and
approaches that one could take.
And I certainly was confused.
But I've really
reached the conclusion
that it isn't that
much of a challenge.
And it's important to
understand that sort
of the gold standard of toxin
assays would be a fat biopsy.
That's because there's a hundred
times more toxins in your fat
than there are in your blood.
They tend to be
stored in the blood.
So really, the key, the
central core to detoxification
is lowering your body fat.
2/3 of the country
is overweight.
So almost everyone is carrying
around too much body fat
and can stand to lower it.
Now, that's not
true for everyone.
But that's really
the central core.
And how do you do that?
You do that by eating
the right foods
and engaging in an
exercise program.
But while you're
doing that process,
or especially if
you are suffering
from signs of
toxicity, then you may
want to engage in
some other components.
And some of the ones I've
learned to be particularly
useful is infrared saunas,
combined with exercise,
so that you can engage
in an exercise program--
ideally a Peak 8 program
where you're really sweating
and getting your heart moving--
and then go into an
infrared sauna for an hour.
And you can actually
even tweak this
a little further from
a protocol that I
learned by one of the top
detoxification specialists
on the East Coast.
So there's a doctor
out of Washington DC
who's actually received a grant
from the Department of Defense
to treat Gulf War
and 9/11 victims
and has had a fair
measure of success.
And his protocol is
that he initially
puts people on progressively
larger amounts of niacin
or vitamin B3.
Not everyone can tolerate this
because one of the side effects
of niacin is this flushing.
So most people can tolerate
50, 100 milligrams.
But he eventually
wants to get them up
to like 5,000 milligrams, which
will cause them to be massively
red, and this vasodilation.
And it basically increases
the circulation process
so that there's this
breakdown and lipolysis
of the fat in conjunction
with moving the toxins out
of the system.
And if you combine that
with an infrared sauna,
you're actually sweating
these toxins out of the body.
Should be very effective.
And of course you can use
other conjunctive modalities
such as enemas and
cleansing in that area,
and combining it with a
variety of adjuvants to act,
such as zeolite in other
clays that can be used.
Niacin is not really
chelating the metals.
It's not like DNPS or DMSA.
It doesn't complex--
or chlorella--
with the metals at all.
What it does is it enhances
the body's circulatory response
so it increases
perfusion, causes
the body to actually break
down the fat a little better.
And because of that process
and increased circulation,
the body is able to
eliminate the toxins
through other routes,
primarily sweating,
especially if you're
using an infrared sauna.
So it comes out in the sweat.
And if you're actually
using a sauna to do this,
you have to clean the
sauna because it'll
be filled with toxins.
I mean, literally
filled, so you have
to be really careful about that.
And in commercial
institutions that use this,
they actually vent this out
through a special filter
because it's very toxic, the
materials that are actually
excreted from people who are
going through this process.
With our current
economy, which I
believe will get worse
before it gets better,
and many people
will be suffering--
and we don't have to look
too-- in recent history,
I mean, Egyptian crises that
we had was primarily mediated
through food prices.
So this is a significant issue
and will become progressively
more important in the future.
So the challenge is to find
healthy foods alternatives
to the processed crap that
people are eating and consuming
that's getting them sick.
So there's a perception
that healthy food
has to be expensive.
And while it may be
a bit more expensive
in some cases in
the short term, it's
certainly cheaper
in the long run.
But the practical
question becomes, well,
how do you afford it?
Well, you do the best you can.
And typically, in
many cases, it's
going to involve making
choices and actually putting
a priority.
In America, we spend a lot less
on food than other countries.
I think it's probably
close to 10%, where
in many other countries
it might be 20, 30%.
Now, I think that
percentage is going
to increase with
food inflation, which
is coming around the corner.
But the issue is it's
a matter of increasing
the percentage
you spend on food,
recognizing that it really is
an important consideration,
and making sacrifices or
cutbacks in other areas
if you have a limited pot.
Now, if you're really
economically challenged,
then you can become creative.
And there's food banks
that are available.
And what I would strongly
recommend and actually
going to seek to catalyze
to facilitate a project
where there's enormous
waste in this country--
I mean, literally
billions of pounds of food
are thrown away every year.
It's just shocking how
much waste there is.
And it's largely
related to the fact
that there's this
fear of liability.
So these grocery stores
are just throwing it away,
throwing in the
dumpsters, because they
don't want to give
it to food bank
because if someone
gets sick because it's
a little bit dated, they're
concerned about liability.
Well, this is shocking, because
President Clinton in the United
States passed legislation of
Good Samaritan legislation
which essentially insulated
them from any that type
of prosecution.
So that exists, but there's
still not this infrastructure
or this process that can allow
the transfer of this really
good food that's being
wasted every day.
So if an individual's
in that circumstance,
he can connect to the food
bank that's in their area
and seek to strategize and
develop a program where they
can volunteer and transfer--
talk to the people
at the local stores
and transfer that wasted
produce every day in food--
the perishables--
to the food bank
so that we can use that food
instead of throwing it away.
So that's a very creative
and a very efficient and less
wasteful strategy than
we're currently doing.
And really seek to always
get organic if you can.
Even if you can't afford
it, make the compromises,
because that's going to
really ultimately lower
the price in the long run.
Right now, because
of the bastardization
of the food system and
the regulatory agencies,
it is illegal to label a food
as GMO without consequences.
So really the only
way you can be
assured of getting non GMO foods
we all want is to get organic.
Because by the strictest
definition of the standards,
GMO cannot be included, at
least up to a certain level,
other than
contaminant, of course.
So that's what you
want to get you.
You can stay away
from GMO products
and the potential problems
and complications with that
and avoid the other toxins
that are contributed.
So it may be a little more
expensive, but in long run
it's going to be less.
And then by putting
this economic pressure
and voting with your
dollars, eventually
it comes down because
then the industry
will move in that direction.
So when it comes to
extending your lifespan,
I think there's some really
effective strategies.
Ray Kurzweil is
one of the pioneers
and really a brilliant man at
promoting the use of technology
to extend our lifespan.
And he has a concept called the
singularity which he believes
will occur somewhere the next
30 years or so, 35 years.
And that is where
this transition
occurs where the technology is
developed so radically that we
can extend our lifespans
quite dramatically
to the point where--
100, 200, 300 years.
I mean, the traditional
lifespan has been to 120.
But I'm pretty convinced that
most people viewing this,
if you maintain a
healthy lifespan,
that you're going to reach
this bridge where you'll
be able to employ these
technologies, which are largely
related to STEM
cells and telomere
lengthening processes,
that will essentially
allow you to go to 150 or
200 I think in our lifespan.
I don't think it's unreasonable.
It may sound shocking.
And humans have not
done that before.
But if you look at--
it's interesting
if you look at
history and see what
our average lifespan has been.
It's improved quite dramatically
over the last 50 to 100 years.
I mean, we're talking
20, 30, 40 year
increases for many countries.
I mean, 30 or 40 years.
So adding another 40 years
where we're at now, or 50 or 60,
isn't too unreasonable,
especially when
you integrate the impact of
the technological revolution,
specifically Moore's law, where
you're developing increasing
computing capacity at a rapidly
reduced fraction of what
the previous capacity cost.
So the issue becomes the bridge.
So the bridge is to stay healthy
long enough so that you can
have access to the technology.
So what do you do?
So what is the single
most important variable
that will contribute to
slowing down the aging process?
Lowering your insulin levels.
If you have an
insulin resistance
or an elevated
fasting insulin, that
is the single most
important element
that will accelerate aging.
So that means you've got
to stay away from sugar.
I mean, you can have
it occasionally.
We all need to celebrate.
But you really
want to avoid sugar
for the most part
or anything that's
going to raise it-- so
even fruits in excess
can be a problem.
And if you don't believe
me, just believe your body.
Go and do the test.
Get a fasting insulin level
and find out for yourself.
Don't guess.
And let your body tell
you if it's true or not.
So you may have
to really restrict
fruits and grains which are
traditionally by many people
viewing this felt to be healthy,
but in many people are not.
So do that.
And of course, you've
got to exercise.
There's just no way
you're not going
to do it without a
good exercise program.
And I'm a particular fan of
these high intensity exercises.
We developed a program
called Peak 8 which
is really designed to exercise
the superfast muscle fibers.
And as a result of that, they
will increase growth hormone
to dramatic levels--
I mean, really shockingly
levels that you
would see from a child.
And it does it at
no cost to you.
There's no charge.
And if Susie, you were
to take this hormone,
it's only available
intravenously
or intramuscularly-- that it
would cost you $1,500 a month
to take.
And then you'd have the side
effects and complications
of not knowing what
the right dose is.
So that's one.
And then with respect
to antioxidants,
which is certainly another
part of aging, because--
I'm a big fan of
using food based ones.
And one of the most powerful
ones is relatively new.
And many people watching
this would probably
have not heard of it.
It's called astaxanthin.
And that is a antitoxin
derived from marine algae.
And it's one of the most
potent known naturally
occurring antioxidants.
Literally it has 500 times the
free radical quenching capacity
of vitamin E. It's
shockingly effective.
It is what gives
the color to salmon.
Or many people don't know that
pink flamingos are born white,
and they don't get
pink until they
have astaxanthin, because
it's in their food supply.
So it really gives
the pink color.
Now it's a shockingly
effective supplement.
It's one that I take every day.
I really think that
everyone should be on it.
And it's been shown to
protect against a number
of interesting diseases.
One of the most common cause of
blindness in the United States
is age related
macular degeneration.
And it would virtually
eliminate that.
Cataracts is really
pervasive too,
which won't cause blindness.
We have a pretty effective
surgery for that.
But why have the surgery if you
don't have to have the disease?
So this can prevent cataracts.
And interestingly,
if you're on it
for a few weeks, many fair skin
and light complexion people
will appreciate
this, it virtually
eliminates the risk of sunburn.
So it's really potent.
So I mean, sun is
good and healthy,
but of course we
have to be careful.
And it certainly can
cause photoaging.
And
Actually, interestingly,
studies were shown that when
you look at these carotenoids,
because astaxanthin
is in the carotenoid family.
It's just much more powerful
than beta carotene, which
is the classic carotenoid.
Far more effective.
So it's really-- it's a
lipid fat soluble one,
so you have to take it with fat.
Because if you just
swallow it without eating,
then you're not going
to absorb as much of it,
but it's really beneficial.
So with respect to super foods,
I think that's one of the best.
Of course, there's a
lot of traditional ones.
And it could be a
topic for a whole DVD
to go into all of those.
But that's one of my
personal favorites, I think,
that should be used on a
regular basis by everyone.
As you seek to
improve your health,
you're going to want to include
certain types of foods, classes
of foods, that are
typically ignored
in the American culture.
Now, this is not controversial.
The most conservative
nutritionists
will recommend that we need
six to eight servings of fruits
and vegetables,
they like to say.
But I always like
to twist it around.
It should be
vegetables and fruits,
because vegetables are really
the most beneficial food group
that we can have access to.
And most people are
not getting enough.
They just aren't.
I mean, you need a lot
of good vegetables,
because they're full of the
full range of phytonutrients
and antioxidants and everything
that you need to stay healthy.
But also, and most people don't
realize this, it's living.
It's a live food.
And when the
vegetable is growing
in the ground as a plant,
it actually has energy.
And you can measure this if you
have sophisticated equipment.
They do this in Germany.
The technology is not as
readily available here,
but it's called biophotons.
And you can actually-- and
there are certain other meters
that can show it.
And you can show that vibrant,
healthy vegetables will
have a different appearance
under these instruments
than ones at aren't,
especially nonorganic ones
with commercial
fertilizers and pesticides.
And if you get these
healthy vegetables,
you can actually
transfer this energy
directly from the
sun into you, along
with all the other important
accessory micronutrients.
So it's essential to have
large amounts of vegetables
every day.
It really is crucial.
Now one of the ways
that I cheat this,
because getting
vegetables is a challenge,
is that I do vegetable juicing.
So I'll typically buy, I don't
know, 20 pounds of vegetables
a week, maybe more, and
juice a few pounds a day,
essentially a quart of
dark green vegetable
juice that consist of--
I like celery and
cucumbers as a base,
and then I add the dark,
deep green leafy vegetables
like kale or collards.
And there's a number of
different types of kale.
Those are the two big
ones, but then you
can also use other
dark green vegetables.
And then they're bitter,
though, so that's a challenge
that many people have.
And you're not going to drink
it if it doesn't taste good.
So one of the simple
tricks you can use
is to cut up a lime, which
even though it's a fruit
has virtually no fructose.
It has one of the lowest
amounts of fructose
of any fruits known.
So you just cut up a
lime, put in there,
and then it really
tastes pretty good.
And it's a delightful drink.
So this lime will--
doesn't make it really
sweet, but it just
does an amazing thing
to the bitterness.
It virtually eliminates
for the most part.
Now, many people, to
compensate for this,
will put in other
fruits like apples
or large amounts of carrots.
I would caution you against
that because you're really
increasing the fructose content.
And if you don't believe
me, please, please, please
read what I've written
about fructose.
It is not your friend.
It is one of the
enemies of helping you
slow down the aging process.
You've got to limit fructose.
And especially in the form of
juice, it's really important.
Fresh juice is going to
be better, of course,
but you really want to keep
your fructose level low.
So the lime has virtually
no fructose in it.
So I'd stay away from apples.
You can have a few carrots,
but don't use a lot.
And it will actually
provide you with an easy way
to massively increase the amount
of green vegetable food matter
that you're getting
into your body.
So I just like to mention
one other component
about fruit juice,
because of this perception
that it's healthy.
And fruits in relatively
small quantities
are going to be OK, especially
with low insulin resistance.
But I want to caution anyone
about buying a commercial fruit
juice.
Don't do it.
And this is because--
this actually came out
of the understanding
of the whole issue
with aspartame,
because it has methanol
and formaldehyde toxicity.
And the advocates of
aspartame were saying, well,
fruits have plenty of
methanol in it too.
Yes, they do.
But in fruits the methanol
is bound up with pectin.
And if you're eating
a raw fresh fruit,
it bypasses through your system
because your body doesn't have
the enzymes to break it down.
But when you juice it or
separate it from the pulp,
that methanol disassociates.
And the longer it's in a bottle,
the higher the concentration
will be.
So you're getting levels
of wood alcohol, which
are directly toxic.
And there are some fairly
significant studies
that have a strong
support and association
between that use
of that methanol
and autoimmune problems like MS.
So I'd really be careful
about fruit juices.
And I would avoid them.
If you're going to
juice, juice it fresh.
And I'm not a big
fan of fruit juice,
because if you're going to have
it, just have the whole fruit.
It's a little better for you.
So unfortunately, the
typical American breakfast
is really literally a disaster.
That's why I like
to be proactive.
And I do travel, of course.
And when I travel, I
bring my breakfast with me
I typically have
raw eggs, which you
can transfer-- organic, free
range raw pasture chickens.
Have the eggs, and
then I have a protein
that we have-- it was taken
from raw, organic cow milk.
So in addition to the raw eggs,
I have some protein powder,
whey protein, that's
taken and extracted
from organic grass
fed cows, pastured
cows, that is very healthy.
So I combine that
with the raw eggs
and it's a really
beneficial breakfast for me.
And I can avoid the
typical American breakfast
which is an absolute disaster.
I mean, usually you've got toast
or bagels, cereal, waffles,
pancakes, orange juice that's
probably not only pasteurized
but is in a bottle,
or reconstituted.
And it's full of methanol
and can potentially
cause lots of problems.
So really, one of
the simple things
you can do to improve your
health is never have any soda.
There's just no reason for soda.
And then if you were
to focus on one meal,
focus on your breakfast.
Clean up your breakfast, because
almost universally breakfast
is a problem for
everyone, because
the standard American
breakfast is so unhealthy.
And if you're really
in a bind, and you're
traveling or something, then
buy a dinner the night before
and have that dinner,
because it's easier
to find a healthy dinner
than it is a breakfast.
It is really, really challenging
to find any healthy breakfast.
I mean, if you think
oatmeal is healthy,
if you have insulin resistance,
don't do the oatmeal.
It is not going to be a problem.
You really need some
high quality protein.
I mean, a green vegetable
juice in the morning
would be fine too, but you do
need a source a good protein.
[MUSIC PLAYING]